Update documentation for 0.20 (#124)
AssemblyScript/website: src/runtime.md

# Runtime

The AssemblyScript runtime implements the necessary bits for memory management and garbage collection. It is largely invisible to a developer but can become relevant in advanced use cases, for example when integrating AssemblyScript in new environments.

::: tip
If not applicable to your use case, i.e. it is not necessary to interact with the runtime directly, you can safely skip this section.
:::

## Variants

The runtime comes in different flavors, each useful in different use cases. The desired runtime can be specified with the `--runtime` compiler option:

```
  --runtime             Specifies the runtime variant to include in the program.

                         incremental  TLSF + incremental GC (default)
                         minimal      TLSF + lightweight GC invoked externally
                         stub         Minimal runtime stub (never frees)
                         ...          Path to a custom runtime implementation

  --exportRuntime       Exports the runtime helpers (__new, __collect etc.).
```

> The default `incremental` runtime provides the full package recommended in most use cases. The `minimal` runtime is a stripped down variant (no shadow stack, no heuristic, simpler algorithm, smaller and more efficient) that is not automated and requires calling `__collect` externally at appropriate times (when the execution stack in unwound), whereas the `stub` runtime does not provide a garbage collector at all and never frees (simple bump allocation, extremely small).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default `incremental` runtime provides the full package recommended in most use cases. The `minimal` runtime is a stripped down variant (no shadow stack, no heuristic, simpler algorithm, smaller and more efficient) that is not automated and requires calling `__collect` externally at appropriate times (when the execution stack is unwound), whereas the `stub` runtime does not provide a garbage collector at all and never frees (simple bump allocation, extremely small).
```
Elaborate on what an unwound execution stack is exactly?

For example, the `stub` runtime can be useful where modules are short-lived and collected as a whole anyhow, while the `minimal` runtime provides a compromise for use cases where it is sufficient to collect garbage manually, occasionally, say where a module performs a fixed amount of work before being invoked again.

In case of doubt, use `incremental`, but feel free to experiment with the other potentially more efficient variants where a use case permits.

## Interface

Using the `--exportRuntime` compiler option, the runtime interface can be exported from the module to the host, so it becomes possible to allocate new managed objects and invoke the garbage collector externally.

It is typically not necessary to invoke the runtime interface manually since generated bindings take care of all the internals. In environments where bindings are not yet available, however, the runtime interface can be utilized to provide the necessary integration.

* ```ts
  function __new(size: usize, id: u32): usize
  ```

>   Allocates a new garbage collected instance of the object represented by the specified class id, of at least the specified size. Returns the pointer to the object, typically pointing at the object's data respectively its first field.

Reviewer: ```
typically pointing at the object's data respectively its first field.
```
This doesn't make sense.

* ```ts
  function __pin(ptr: usize): usize
  ```

>   Pins the object pointed to by `ptr` externally so it and its directly reachable members and indirectly reachable objects do not become garbage collected. Note that the same object cannot be pinned more than once.

Reviewer: > its directly reachable members and indirectly reachable objects 

To be honest, I have no idea what this means.

>   An external object that is not referenced from within WebAssembly must be pinned whenever an allocation might happen in between its allocation and passing it to WebAssembly. If not pinned, the allocation may trigger the garbage collector to step, which would prematurely collect the object and lead to undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  An external object that is not referenced from within WebAssembly must be pinned whenever an allocation might happen in between allocating it and passing it to WebAssembly. If not pinned, the allocation may trigger the garbage collector to step, which would prematurely collect the object and lead to undefined behavior.
```

* ```ts
  function __unpin(ptr: usize): void
  ```
  Unpins the object pointed to by `ptr` externally so it can become garbage collected. Note that the respective object must have been pinned before for the unpin operation to succeed.

* ```ts
  function __collect(): void
  ```
  Performs a full garbage collection.

* ```ts
  const __rtti_base: usize
  ```
  Pointer to runtime type information in linear memory. RTTI contains information about the various classes utilized in a binary, mapping class ids to object kinds, their key and value layout, and base classes. Its layout is described in detail in [shared/typeinfo](https://github.com/AssemblyScript/assemblyscript/blob/main/std/assembly/shared/typeinfo.ts). Using RTTI, it becomes possible to implement `instanceof` for example, or to tell strings, arrays etc. apart.

## Memory layout

> Besides partitioning memory into static data (starts at `0`), the stack (starts at `__data_end`) and the heap (starts at `__heap_base`), in this order, any kind of managed object in AssemblyScript utilizes a managed header for the runtime to operate on:

Reviewer: The syntax of this sentence took me a while to understand. Rewrite?

### Header layout

| Name     | Offset | Type  | Description
| :------- | -----: | :---- | :----------
| mmInfo   |    -20 | usize | Memory manager info
| gcInfo   |    -16 | usize | Garbage collector info
| gcInfo2  |    -12 | usize | Garbage collector info
| rtId     |     -8 | u32   | Unique id of the concrete class
| rtSize   |     -4 | u32   | Size of the data following the header
|          |        |       |
|          |      0 |       | Payload starts here

> References to an object always point at the start of the payload, with the header sitting in the 20 bytes before. Null references are just the value `0`. When working with an AssemblyScript module externally, knowing the memory layout can be helpful to for example obtain an object's class id or size. Invoking `__new` automatically prepends a managed header and registers the object with the GC, using the provided class id for `rtId` and the provided size for `rtSize`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
References to an object always point at the start of the payload, with the header beginning 20 bytes before. Null references are just the value `0`. When working with an AssemblyScript module externally, knowing the memory layout can be helpful to for example obtain an object's class id or size. Invoking `__new` automatically prepends a managed header and registers the object with the GC, using the provided class id for `rtId` and the provided size for `rtSize`.
```

### Class layout

> Class fields are layed out similar to C structs, sequentially and without packing. Each field is aligned to its type's native alignment, potentially leaving padding in between. If a class has the `@unmanaged` decorator, it effectively only describes a region of memory as if it was a struct, does not utilize a managed header, is not garbage collected, and can be used with `heap.free`. Managed classes with a managed header cannot be manually freed, and managed and unmanaged classes cannot be mixed (e.g. extend from each other).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Class fields are laid out similarly to C structs: sequentially and without packing. Each field is aligned to its type's native alignment, potentially leaving padding in between. If a class has the `@unmanaged` decorator, it effectively only describes a region of memory as if it were a struct that does not utilize a managed header, is not garbage collected, and can be used with `heap.free`. Managed classes with a managed header cannot be manually freed, and managed and unmanaged classes cannot be mixed (e.g. extend from each other).
```
https://www.grammarly.com/blog/conditional-sentences-was-instead-of-were/

Standard library data types use the following layouts:

Class           | Description
----------------|-------------
ArrayBuffer     | Buffers always use class id `0`, with their untyped data as the payload.
String          | Strings always use class id `1`, with their 16-bit char codes (UTF-16 code units, allowing isolated surrogates like JS) as the payload. For example, if `rtSize` is `8`, the string's `.length` is `4`.

> TypedArray      | Typed arrays are objects composed of `buffer` (reference to the viewed `ArrayBuffer`), `dataStart` (start pointer into `buffer`) and `byteLength` fields, in this order. The respective id is picked sequentially and not predetermined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypedArray      | Typed arrays are objects composed of `buffer` (the reference to the viewed `ArrayBuffer`), `dataStart` (the start pointer into `buffer`) and `byteLength` fields, in this order. The respective id is picked sequentially and not predetermined.
```

> Array\<T>       | Normal arrays use the same layout as the typed arrays, with an additional mutable `length` field coming last.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Array\<T>       | Normal arrays use the same layout as typed arrays, with an additional mutable `length` field coming last.
```

> StaticArray\<T> | Static arrays do not need indirection due to not being resizable and have their data right in the payload, aligned according to `T`. Can be thought of as a typed buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StaticArray\<T> | Static arrays do not need indirection due to not being resizable, and they have their data right in the payload, aligned according to `T`. Can be thought of as a typed buffer.
```

Function        | Functions are objects composed of their table `index` and their lexical `env` (currently always `0`).
Map/Set/...     | Other collection use more complex layouts. Please refer to their respective sources.

> It is also possible to build custom data types that integrate with the GC by implementing the `__visit` interface (iterates all references contained in an object of this kind). Please refer to the existing data types' sources for examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to build custom data types that integrate with the GC by implementing the `__visit` interface (that iterates all references contained in an object of this kind). Please refer to the sources of preexisting data types for examples.
```

## Calling convention

> AssemblyScript's calling convention is relatively straight forward, as it does not add additional parameters to functions or similar. Note that generated bindings take care of the calling convention automatically, but other environments may want to adhere to it specifically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AssemblyScript's calling convention is relatively straight forward, as it does not add additional parameters to functions or other behind-the-scenes magic. Note that generated bindings take care of the calling convention automatically, but other environments may want to adhere to it specifically.
```

### Basic values

> Exported functions wrap basic numeric return values to their respective value ranges. Basic numeric values passed to exported functions are wrapped to their respective value ranges on demand. Functions internal to the module do not provide these guarantees.

Reviewer: > Functions internal to the module do not provide these guarantees.

I don't know what this means

### Managed values

> Any kind of object is passed as a pointer into memory, and the host is expected to perform the steps necessary to exchange the value between linear memory and the host system. Passing a string for example passes a pointer to its first char code, and the managed header can be evaluated to obtain the string's byte length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any kind of object is passed as a pointer into memory, and the host is expected to perform the steps necessary to exchange the value between linear memory and the host system. Passing a string, for example, is composed of passing a pointer to its first char code, and using the managed header to obtain the string's byte length.
```

### Optional arguments

> When an exported function allows one or multiple arguments to be omitted, the module must be informed of the number of significant arguments by calling `exports.__setArgumentsLength(numArgs)` before calling the export, so it can fill in default values. Omitted arguments are not evaluated, zeroes can be passed. Not calling the helper leads to undefined behavior. If a function has a fixed number of arguments, it is not necessary to call the helper. The helper may not be present if a module only exports functions with a fixed number of arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an exported function allows one or multiple arguments to be omitted, the module must be informed of the number of significant arguments by calling `exports.__setArgumentsLength(numArgs)` before calling the export, so it can fill in default values. Omitted arguments are not evaluated, i.e. zeroes can be passed. Not calling the helper leads to undefined behavior. If a function has a fixed number of arguments, it is not necessary to call the helper. The helper may not be present if a module only exports functions with a fixed number of arguments.
```

## Memory layout

Overall, AssemblyScript partitions liner memory as follows:

| Region        | Start offset  | End offset            | Description
|---------------|---------------|-----------------------|-------------
| Static data   | `0`           | `__data_end`          | Contents of static strings, arrays, etc.
| Managed stack | `__data_end`  | `__heap_base`         | Present only if the incremental runtime is used.
| Heap          | `__heap_base` | `memory.size() << 16` | Remaining space is used for dynamic allocations. Can grow.

### Header layout

Any kind of managed object in AssemblyScript utilizes a managed header for the runtime to operate on:

| Name     | Offset | Type  | Description
| :------- | -----: | :---- | :----------
| mmInfo   |    -20 | usize | Memory manager info
| gcInfo   |    -16 | usize | Garbage collector info
| gcInfo2  |    -12 | usize | Garbage collector info
| rtId     |     -8 | u32   | Unique id of the concrete class
| rtSize   |     -4 | u32   | Size of the data following the header
|          |        |       |
|          |      0 |       | Payload starts here

> References to an object always point at the start of the payload, with the header beginning in the 20 bytes before. Null references are just the value `0`. When working with an AssemblyScript module externally, knowing the memory layout can be helpful to for example obtain an object's class id or size. Invoking `__new` automatically prepends a managed header and registers the object with the GC, using the provided class id for `rtId` and the provided size for `rtSize`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
References to an object always point at the start of the payload, with the header beginning 20 bytes before. Null references are just the value `0`. When working with an AssemblyScript module externally, knowing the memory layout can be helpful to for example obtain an object's class id or size. Invoking `__new` automatically prepends a managed header and registers the object with the GC, using the provided class id for `rtId` and the provided size for `rtSize`.
```
